M. d'Epinoy committed her to the care of the shepherd, who dwelt near the castle, recommending her to him in the most anxious manner, and promising to reward him handsomely for his pains. The man accordingly took her to his house, in order to begin to tame her; and on this account they called her in the neighbourhood, The shepherd's beast. We may well conceive, that it would require a considerable space of time, and some harsh usage to wean her from her former habits, and to temper her fierce and savage disposition; and I have good reason to believe, that she was very closely confined in this house; for she informed me herself, that she found means to make holes in the walls, and in the tiles of the roof, upon which she would run, with as much unconcern as on the ground, never suffering herself to be retaken without a great deal of trouble, and passing so artfully, (as they afterwards told her) through small holes, that they could scarcely believe their eyes, after they had seen her do it. It was thus that she escaped once, among several other times, out of this house in a most severe storm of frost and snow; on which occasion, after making good her escape, she betook herself for shelter to a tree. The dread of the resentment of M. d'Epinoy threw the whole family that night into a hurry and confusion; who never imagining, that in so excessive a frost, she would have ventured into the country, rummaged every corner of the house; but finding all their researches in vain, they at last resolved, that they might leave no means untried, to look for her without likewise; where, behold, they find Miss perched, as I have just said, on the top of a tree! from whence, however, they were lucky enough to prevail on her to descend.

I myself have been an eye-witness of some instances of the ease and swiftness with which she ran, than which nothing could be more surprising; and yet what I saw was but the remains of her former agility, which long sickness, and the want of practice for many years, have greatly impaired. Without having seen it, it is hardly possible to imagine her singular and agile manner of running. It was not at all setting one foot before the other alternately, as we do; it was a sort of flying gallop, almost too quick for the eye.—It was rather jumping than running, one foot being kept constantly behind the other. One could scarcely observe the motion motion either of her body or feet; and to run along with her was impossible. The small example I was shown, which was but a trifle, having been performed only in a hall of no great length, convinced me, nevertheless, of the truth of what she had told me before, that even for several years after she was caught, she could overtake the game in the chace. Of this she gave proof in presence of the Queen of Poland, mother to the Queen of France, about the year 1737, as she was going to take possession of the Duchy of Lorrain. That Princess, in passing by Chalons, having heard of the young savage, who was at that time in the convent des Regentes, had her brought before her. Though she had been then several years tamed, yet her disposition, her behaviour, even her voice and speech, were, as she affirms herself, but like those of a child four or five years old. The sound of her voice, though weak, was sharp, shrill, and piercing; and her words were short and confused, like those of a child, at a loss for terms to express it's meaning. In a word, her childish and familiar gestures and behaviour shewed plainly, that as yet she only took notice of the persons who caressed her the most; which the Queen of Poland did extremely. On being informed of the swiftness of her running, the Queen desired that she might accompany her to the chace. There finding herself at liberty, and giving full scope to her natural inclination, the young savage pursued the hares and rabbits that were started, took them, and returning at the same pace, delivered them to the Queen. That Princess discovered some intention of carrying the little savage along with her, in order to place her in a convent at Nancy; but was dissuaded from it by those who had the care of her education in the convent of Chalons, where she was then boarded, at the expence of the late Duke of Orleans. The Queen, however, promised to write in her favour to her daughter the Queen of France, to whom she sent at the same time a plant, consisting of several branches of artificial flowers, presented her by the little savage, who bad already learned an art which she has practised much since, that of imitating nature in works of that sort. By the death of the Queen of Poland, she suffered a loss which the goodness of the Queen her daughter was alone sufficient to compensate.—I return to the period immediately subsequent to her capture, and to the beginning of her education. But before entering upon that, I must relate the most certain accounts that have come to my knowledge of her adventures before she made her appearance in the village of Songi.

Madamoiselle Le Blanc, the name by which she is now called, remembers perfectly well her having passed a river two or three days before she was taken; and we shall see by and by, that this is one of the most certain facts of her history. She was then accompanied by another girl, a little older than herself, and a black likewise; but whether that was her natural colour, or whether she was only painted, like Le Blanc, is uncertain. They were swimming across a river, and diving to catch some fishes, as I shall have occasion to describe more particularly in the sequel, when they were observed by one M. de St. Martin, a gentleman of that neighbourhood, as Madamoiselle Le Blanc was afterwards told, who, seeing nothing but the two black heads of the children now and then appearing above the water, mistook them, as he says himself, for two water cocks, and fired at them from a good distance. Luckily, however, he missed them; but the report made them dive, and retire farther off.

The little Le Blanc, on her part, had a fish in each hand, and an eel in her teeth. After having gutted and washed their fish, she and her companion eat, or rather devoured it; for, by her account, they did not chew their meat, but holding it in their hand, tore it with their fore teeth into small pieces, which they swallowed without chewing. After finishing their repast, they directed their course into the country, leaving the river at their back. Soon after, she who is now become Madamoiselle Le Blanc, perceived the first a chaplet on the ground, which, no doubt, had been dropt by some passenger. Whether the novelty of the object delighted her, or whether it brought to her remembrance something of the same kind that she had seen before, is not known; but she immediately fell a dancing and exclaiming for joy: and being apprehensive lest her companion should deprive her of her little treasure, she stretched out her hand to take it up; upon which the other, with her baton, struck her so severe a stroke on the hand, that she lost the use of it for some moments. She had, however, strength enough left as with the weapon in her other hand to return the blow on the forehead of her antagonist, with such a force as to knock her to the ground, screaming frightfully. The chaplet was the reward of her victory, of which she made herself a bracelet. Touched in the mean time, as it would seem with compassion for her companion, whose wound bled very much, she ran in search of some frogs, and finding one, she stripped off it's skin, which she spread on her forehead, to stop the blood, binding up the wound with a thread of the bark of a tree, which she peeled off with her nails. After this they separated; she that was wounded taking the road towards the river, and the victorious Le Blanc that towards Songi.

It will be understood that all these particulars, as well as many others, preceding and subsequent to this adventure, of which I have supprest several, were not recounted by Le Blanc, till after she had learnt to express herself in French. But as to the principal fact, the quarrel between the two girls, it is one of the first of which she gave an account. Two having been seen swimming across the river, as we have said above, the people could hardly fail to enquire, by signs at least, at Le Blanc, very soon after she was seized, when the thing must have been fresh in her memory, what was become of her companion. To which she answered, partly by signs, and partly by words, (suggested to her, no doubt, at the time) that she had made her red, meaning that she had drawn her blood. Of this expression, tho' much talk'd of at the time, no mention is made, in a letter dated from Chalons the 9th of December 1731, about two months after she was taken, and printed in the Mercury of France. According to the writer of that letter, she only knew then a few French words ill articulated, some of which he mentions.

I Have been able to discover nothing certain with regard to the companion of Madamoiselle Le Blanc. M. de L——, formerly preceptor to M. d'Epinoy's children, says, that when he first became acquainted with Le Blanc, about two years after her capture, it was reported in the country, that the other girl had been found dead at the distance of some leagues from the place where they had fought. Madamoiselle Le Blanc tells, that she heard of her having been found (she does not say whether dead or alive) near Toul in Lorrain. In that case she must, dangerously wounded as she was, have reswam the Marne, which is equally improbable with what Mademoiselle Le Blanc further tells she heard of some papers having been found upon that girl, who was bigger and older than she, which could throw light upon their preceding adventures. The letter formerly mentioned, which was wrote recently after the thing happened, only says, that the little Negro girl had been again seen near Cheppe, a village in the neighbourhood of Songi, but had not afterwards appeared. Whatever may have been the case, she was never more talk'd of.

There is much greater uncertainty still as to what happened to these two children, previous to their arriving in Champagne; Le Blanc's memory, on that head, being indistinct and confused. I shall relate, however, every particular I have been able to draw from her in the several different conversations we have had together since the commencement of our acquaintance, from which I shall endeavour to form some probable conjectures about her native country, and the adventures that may have brought her into Champagne.—But to return to her history.

The squeaking cries she utter'd thro' her throat, by way of language, were, I believe not the least occasion of the harsh treatment she sometimes underwent: They were indeed frightful, those of anger or fear especially, which I could easily conceive from a specimen exhibited by her in my presence, of one of the most moderate, expressive of her joy or friendship, and at which, had I not been put on my guard beforehand, I should have been heartily frightened. The most terrible of all were utter'd by her on the approach of any unknown person, with an intention to take hold of her, at which she discovered a horror that appeared altogether extraordinary. Of this she once gave a strong instance in the house of M. de Beaupré, at present a counsellor of state, but at that time intendant of the province of Champagne, to whom she had been brought soon after, being placed in the hospital general of St. Maur at Chalons, which, by the certificate of her baptism, is fix'd to the 30th of October 1731. A man who had heard of her abhorrence of being touched, resolved nevertheless to embrace her, in spite of the danger that he was told, as an unknown person he ran, in going too near her. She had in her hand at the time a piece of raw beef which she was devouring with great satisfaction: And by way of precaution, they kept fast hold of her cloaths. The instant she saw the man near her, in the attitude of taking hold of her arm, she gave him such a violent stroke on the face, both with her hand, and the piece of flesh she held in it, that he was so stunn'd and blinded, as to be scarcely able to keep his feet. The savage, at the same time, believing the strangers around her to be so many enemies, who intended to murder her, or dreading, perhaps, punishment for what she had done, sprang out of their hands towards a window, thro' which she had a view of trees and a river, intending to jump from it, and so make her escape; which she would certainly have done, it they had not again catch'd hold of her.