The weaning her from feeding on raw bloody flesh, and the leaves, branches, and roots of trees, was the most difficult and dangerous part of her reformation. Her stomach and constitution having been constantly accustomed to raw food, full of its natural juice, could by no means endure our artificial kinds of food, rendered by cookery, according to the opinion of several physicians, much more difficult of digestion. While she continued at the castle of Songi, and for the two first years that she staid in the hospital of St. Maur at Chalons, M. d'Epinoy, who took care of her, gave orders to carry her, from time to time, the raw fruits and roots of which she was fondest; but in the hospital she was entirely deprived of raw flesh, and raw fishes, which she had found in great plenty about the castle of Songi. She appeared particularly fond of fish, either from her natural taste, or from her having acquired, by constant custom from her childhood, the faculty of catching them in the water with more ease, than she could the wild game by speed of foot. M. de L———. remembers that she retained this inclination for catching fish in the water, two years after her capture: And the same gentleman informed me, that the little savage having been one day brought by order of the Viscount d'Epinoy, to the castle of Songi, where M. de L—— then happened to be, no sooner perceived a door open which led to a large pond, than she immediately ran and threw herself into it, drest as she was, swam round all the sides of it, and landing on a small island, went in search of frogs, which she eat at her leisure. This circumstance puts me in mind of a comical adventure which she told me herself.

When any company visited M. d'Epinoy at Songi, he used to send for the girl, who soon became more tame, and began to discover much good humour, and a softness and humanity of disposition, which the savage life she had been obliged to follow for self-preservation, had not been able altogether to efface; for when she did not appear apprehensive of any harm, she was very tractable and good humoured. One day then that she was present at a great entertainment in the castle, observing none of the delicacies she esteemed, every thing being cook'd, she ran out like lightning, and traversing all the ditches and ponds, returned with her apron full of living frogs, which she spread very liberally on the plates of all the guests; and quite overjoy'd at having found such good cheer, cried out, tien man man, donc tien, (hold man man, hold then) almost the only syllables she could then articulate. We may easily figure to ourselves the confusion and bustle this occasioned among the guests, every one endeavouring to avoid or throw away the frogs that were hopping all about. The little savage quite surprised at the small value they seem'd to set on her delicate fare, carefully gathered up the scattered frogs, and threw them back again on the plates and table. The same thing has happened several times. in different companies.

It was with the utmost difficulty that they dishabituated her from eating raw flesh, and, by slow degrees, reconciled her to our cooked victuals. The first trials she made to accustom herself to victuals drest with salt, and to drink wine, cost her her teeth, which, together with her nails, were preserved as a curiosity. She recovered, indeed, a set of new teeth just like ours, but she irrecoverably hurt her health, which continues to be extremely delicate. From one dangerous disorder, she immediately fell into another, all occasioned by intolerable pains in her stomach and bowels, but especially in her throat, which became parch'd and inflam'd, owing, as the physicians asserted, to the little exercise and nourishment derived to these parts from her new regimen, in comparison of what they had received from the raw victuals she formerly fed upon. These pains frequently produced an universal spasm over her whole body, and weaknesses irreparable by all the arts of cookery. It was, perhaps, on account of some of these disorders which threatned her with instant death, that they thought proper to hasten her baptism. Of this ceremony, she does not retain the least remembrance. She only mentions her having heard afterwards, that it was intended to give her for god-father and god-mother, either M. de Beaupré, governor of Champagne, and a Lady called Madame Dupin; or M. de Choiseul bishop of Chalons, and Madame de Beaupré the governor's lady; but, in their absence, the administrator and governess of the hospital of St. Maur, presented her in their name at the Fount, and gave her the name of Mari Angélique Memmie le Blanc. The reason of giving her the name of Memmie, that of the first bishop of Chalons, was, as she fays, her having come from afar to receive the faith in this diocese, where it had been formerly planted by that Saint. But it appears from her act of baptism, that her godfather bore the same name.

There was but small probability of preserving Madamoiselle le Blanc alive, her best state of health being a sickly languor, which seem'd to be carrying her to the grave. I was informed by M. L——, that M. d'Epinoy, who was solicitous to save her at any expence, sent a physician to see her, who being at a loss what to prescribe, hinted, that it was necessary to indulge her now and then with a bit of raw flesh. Accordingly, she says they gave her some, but she could, by that time, only chew it, and suck out the juice, not being able to swallow the flesh. Sometimes too, a Lady of the house, who had a great affection for her, would bring her a chicken or pigeon alive, of which she immediately suck'd the blood warm, which she found to be a kind of balsam that penetrated every part of her body, softened the acrimony of her parched throat, and brought back her strength. It was with all this trouble, and these narrow escapes, that Madamoiselle Le Blanc, by slow degrees, gave over her raw diet, and accustomed herself to the cooked victuals we eat, and that so entirely, that at present she has a disgust at raw flesh.

As the Viscount d'Epinoy, while he lived, took great pleasure, when at Songi, in seeing his little savage; he kept her in a convent, either at Chalons, or Vitri le François. But he appears to me to have lived only a short while after she was taken, no mention being made of him in her act of baptism, tho' she was baptized seven or eight months after; and yet it is extremely probable, that if he had been alive at that time, he would have been her godfather. It is certain, however, from the information of M, de L——, that after the death of M. d'Epinoy, the little Le Blanc was placed in a convent at Chalons; and that upon the first journey the widow of M. d'Epinoy made to Songi after that event, the same M. L—— who accompanied her, persuaded her to take the child into her own family, where she could be kept at less expence than in a convent. That Lady and M. L— having accordingly made a journey to Chalons, with this intention, found Le Blanc tolerably improved, and pretty expert at several female works, by which she might be useful to Madame d'Epinoy. But the superior of the convent, from some motive that is not known, unless it were the danger to her salvation that the child might run in the great world, prevailed on Madame d'Epinoy to let her remain where she was, informing her at the same time, of some little adventures that seemed still to indicate a latent inclination for swimming and climbing trees, as she had done formerly. From which the Lady being apprehensive, lest the girl might require too much looking after, gave over all thoughts of taking her into her family. From, this period, M. de Choiseul, bishop of Chalons, was the person who took care of her, having given orders to his Vicar-general M. Cazotte, to superintend her instruction in the same convent where she had formerly been placed.

After Le Blanc had lived several years in that convent, and had made applications for permission to assume the veil there, she conceived a disgust at the house, being ashamed to live with people who had seen her in her wild state immediately after she was caught, and before she was civilized; a circumstance which they made her feel very sensibly. On this account, she obtained leave to remove to a convent at Saint Menehold. Upon arriving at that town in the month of September 1747, M. de la Condamine, of the academy of sciences, found her just as she entered the inn, where he dined with her and the hostess, without letting her know that he had designedly fallen in with her, or that she was the object of his curiosity. She informed him of the obligations under which she lay to the Duke of Orleans, who had been at the expence of her board, since the time he had seen her on his way thro' Chalons, as he was returning from Metz in the year 1744: And she exprest great regret at having been dissuaded from accepting of the charitable offer that Prince then made her, to place her in a convent at Paris. M. de la Condamine promised Le Blanc to be the instrument of conveying her sentiments on this head to the Prince. Who having been accordingly informed by him of the situation of Le Blanc, and receiving at the same time from the Vicar general of Chalons satisfaction, with regard to her conduct; he brought her to Paris, placed her in the convent of the Nouvelles Catholiques, in the street St. Anne, and went thither himself to see and converse with her, that he might know what progress she had made in her education. It was there that she first partook of the holy sacrament of the last supper, and received confirmation. Being afterwards removed to the convent of the visitation at Chaillot, still under the patronage of the late Duke of Orleans, she was making preparations for becoming a nun there, when a stroke she received on the head by the fall of a window, and a long disorder which attacked her immeditately afterwards, threw her into them most imminent danger. Her life was despaired of; and by the advice of a physician sent to visit her by the Prince, she was, by his orders, removed to Paris, to the house of the Hospitalieres, in the suburb St. Marceau, where she could more easily receive the assistance her situation required. The Duke of Orleans had the goodness personally to recommend her to the superior and sisters, and to engage not only to pay her board, but likeways all the medicines and trouble that should be thought necessary. That Prince has undoubtedly received the reward of his charity in the other world; but in this, the unhappy Le Blanc reapt very little benefit from his good intentions. In this society, which, by her means, hoped to procure a Prince for its protector, and in him undoubted security for her board, Le Blanc found herself in a manner totally neglected. I shall leave the reader to imagine the melancholy reflections of this unhappy girl, on being, by the death of her noble patron, left weak and languishing, without either relation or friend to take care of her among these religious, who, by that event, saw all their expectations blasted; at the same time, in case of her recovering, she foresaw what neglect, and how many mortifications she must undergo from persons who had no prospect of being repaid their advances on her account.