It was in these disagreeable circumstances that I saw her for the first time in November 1752. They were hardly mended, when Le Blanc had recovered as much strength as to be able to come herself to tell me, that the Duke of Orleans, the inheritor of his father's virtues, had undertaken to pay the nine months board that had fallen due for her since his father's death, and that she had besides, some reason to hope to be put on that Prince's list, for a yearly pension of 200 livres for life; adding, at the same time, that until this last point should be settled, which could not happen till the month of January following, she had accepted of a small apartment, which a person she mentioned had offered her. But how, says I, do you propose to subsist in this apartment for two months, and perhaps more, in your sickly situation? For what purpose, answered she, with a firmness and confidence that surprised me, has God brought me from among wild beasts, and made me a Christian? not, surely, afterwards to abandon, and suffer me to perish for hunger: that is impossible; I know no other father but him, nor no other mother but the blessed Virgin; their providence, therefore, will support me. The pleasure with which I set down this answer, repays, with usury, the pains I have taken to compose the preceding relation, which I shall finish with an account of the answers made by Le Blanc to the several questions I asked her, with regard to what she recollected of the first part of her life: And I shall subjoin the conjectures I have already promised about her native country and the accidents which may have brought heir into France, and given occasion to the very sinular circumstances of her discovery and capture.

Madamoiselle Le Blanc acknowledges, that she did not begin to reflect till after she had made some progress in her education; and that during her life in the woods, she had scarcely any other ideas than a sense of her wants, and a desire to satisfy them. She has no remembrance either of father or mother, or any other person of her own country, and hardly any of the country itself, except that she does not remember to have seen any houses there, but only holes under ground, and a kind of huts like barracks, (a similitude of her own) into which they crept on all four; and she has even an idea that these huts were covered with snow. She adds, that she frequently mounted trees, either to protect herself from wild beasts, or to discover more easily at a distance animals proportioned to her strength and her wants, which she attacked for food. These circumstances were so strongly fixed in her imagination, that when she began to understand French, but before she could express herself in it, which did not happen till a long while after she was taken, when asked whence she came, and who was her father and mother? she used to point to a tree, if there was one near her, and to the ground at the foot of it. The only particular of her infancy of which she retains a slight remembrance, was her having seen, when very young, either in the sea or some river, she knows not which, a huge animal swimming with two feet, like a dog, having a round head resembling that of a bull dog, and large sparkling eyes: that, seeing the creature approaching as if to devour her, she escaped to the land, and ran a great way off. I asked her if the creature had only two feet, and if it had hair, and of what colour? To which she answered, That she did not take time to observe it particularly; but that she saw no more than two feet with which it swam: that it appeared to have but about one half of its body above the water, and the rest below: that she believed she saw hair on it, of a greyish black colour, and short, somewhat like that of a dog whose hair has been newly cut.

This description, so nearly resembling that of a seal; the violent inclination Le Blanc retained for several years after coming to France, of throwing herself into the water, fishing there with her hands, swimming in it in spite of the cold and frost, and of eating every thing raw; and the weakness and faintings she was at first subject to on feeling the heat of the fire or sun, appear to me to be certain proofs of her being born in the north, somewhere near the Frozen Sea, where seals are fished for; and several other observations which I shall submit to the reader incline me to suspect that she is of the Esquimaux nation, which inhabits the country of Labrador, lying to the north of Canada.

Le Blanc acknowledges, that in the various relations she has made to me on different occasions, there are several particulars of which she retains but a confused and indistinct remembrance, and which she suspects to be blended with circumstances that she may have imagined after she began to reflect on the questions asked her at first, and constantly repeated to her afterwards.

