The largest rivers did not at all stop their journey either by day or night; for they alwise crossed them without any dread: Sometimes they entered them merely for the sake of drinking, which they performed by dipping in their chin up to the mouth, and sucking the water like horses. But they most frequently entered the rivers to catch the fishes they perceived at the bottom, which they brought ashore in their hands and mouths, there to open, skin, and eat them, as I have mentioned above.

Having hinted to Madamoiselle Le Blanc, that I had great difficulty to believe it possible for her to make her way out of a deep river, in the manner she mentioned, without the assistance of her hands and breath; she assured me, that without such assistance she always mounted to the surface of the water, a very little breath being alone sufficient for that purpose, of which she had given an example only four years ago. Of this she showed me the manner, standing upright, with both her arms held streight up, as if holding something above the water, having the end of her handkerchief between her teeth, like a fish, breathing at the same time softly, but without interruption, with each corner of her mouth alternately, much in the same manner that a smoaker breathes with one corner of his mouth, while he holds his pipe in the other. In this way, by Le Blanc's account, she and her companion passed the Marne in their way to Songi, where she was taken, as before related.

It remains now from these facts, which are by no means all equally certain, to form some probable conjectures about the way in which these two savages were transported to our continent, and remained undiscovered till their arrival near Chalons in Champagne.

Independent of the natural aversion discovered by Madamoiselle Le Blanc at the fire, of her propensity to plunge into the water in the coldest weather, of her taste for raw fish which was her favourite food, and of the other observations already set down, which do not permit us to doubt of her being a native of some northern region, bordering on the Frozen Ocean: Her white colour, just like our own, is conclusive on this point, leaving not the smallest uncertainty: For it is an undoubted fact, that all the natives of the inland countries of Africa, and of the other warm and temperate climates of America, are either black, olive, or copper-coloured. If therefore the only remaining question were, How two young savages, of some northern country, could have come into France?—It might be solved in many different ways, all equally probable. But the difficulty here is, to account not only for the two separate embarkations, of which Le Blanc retains the remembrance, but likewise for her being carried to, and remaining some time in a country where there were sugar canes and cassave; and further for the black colour with which she was painted. Though here it is by no means our province or intention to compose a romance, or to devise imaginary adventures, yet where certainty is wanting, we must look for probability. Of all the different suppositions I have formed for connecting the various circumstances of this history, what follows is the simplest and the most probable.

It is well known, that all the European nations who have colonies in America, are obliged to carry thither slaves to cultivate the ground, and to prepare its different productions, such as sugar, indigo, tobacco, chocolate, coffee, &c. The Negroes of Africa, when carried to the West Indies, a climate much of the same temperature with their own, accommodate themselves to it without any difficulty, and thrive extremely well; but all attempts to naturalize the savages of the northern regions to that country, have proved unsuccessful. The English, Dutch, and Danes, who have colonies in several of the West India islands, as well as we, have more than once carried off some of the Esquimaux savages who inhabit the country of Labrador to the north of Canada. I imagine then that the captain of a ship from the north of Holland, or Scotland, or some town in Norway, may have carried off a parcel of slaves from some northern country, from Labrador perhaps, with an intention to sell them in the West India islands, where they may have had an opportunity of seeing and eating sugar canes and manioc. The same captain may probably have transported one or two of these slaves to Europe, either because he could not find an opportunity of disposing of them to advantage, or from caprice or curiosity; and the youth of our two little savages might naturally enough procure them that preference; in which case, it is not improbable, that on his arrival in Europe, he may have either sold them, or given them away in a present. And it is likewise probable, that either through a frolic, or with a fraudulent intention, the proprietor may have painted them black, by which means he might pass them for natives of Guinea, and at the same time avoid any challenge on account of his having decoyed them away. There is in America a plant that yields a clear transparent liquor, which rubbed on the skin, renders it perfectly black: This colour indeed wears off in about nine or ten days; but it may be rendered more durable by laying it on in several coats, and mixing with it different ingredients. Hitherto our suppositions are at least plausible; what follows approrches much nearer to certainty, and even to demonstration.

It is indisputable, that some way or other these two children have been brought to Europe by sea. Now, the nearer we shall suppose the place where they were landed, to have been to that where they were found, the more simple and natural will their story appear. Let us then suppose them to have been sold in some port of the Zuyder Sea, and from thence conveyed by the Issel, or by some of the canals which traverse the country thereabouts, to the habitations of their new masters, either in the country of Guelders, for example, or in that of Cleves, upon the banks of the Moselle. We may judge from the account that has been given of the little Le Blanc, how difficult to keep she and her companion were, and that the first moment they found an opportunity to escape, they would not fail to make use of it. That country is very woody, and when once they had reached the forest of the Ardennes, the rest of their story needs no explanation. We have seen that they passed the day in trees, that they knew how to provide their food, and that they never travelled but at night. They either may have roamed by chance, or their instinct may have induced them to proceed towards that quarter, where they saw the sun through the day, and particularly towards that point of the horizon where he had disappeared in the evening, and whither the twilight may have conducted them about the hour when they usually began their journey, as when they swam across the Marne. This journey, of several months continuance, through a woody country, although not amounting perhaps to 50 leagues, in a streight line, may have brought them towards the south west part of Lorrain, and from thence into that part of Champagne where they were found. And thus the adventures of Le Blanc may be easily accounted for.