She has, however, always affirmed, and expressed by signs before she could speak French; that she had twice crossed the sea: and of this fact she positively assured M. de la Coudamine in the year 1747. As to what she has sometimes told of her having been long on sea, by reason of the ship's stopping at different islands, she is at present sensible that this was only a repetition of some commentary she has heard upon her adventures. I was informed by M. L—— that he heard a report about M. d'Epinoy's family, of the two little savages having been sold in some of the islands of America, where, being favourites of their mistress, but disliked by their master, the mistress was obliged to sell them again, and suffer them to be reimbarked either in he ship that had brought them, or in some other. These circumstances tally pretty well with those set forth in the letter already mentioned printed in the Mercury of France: But it is apparent, that these particulars arise altogether from conjectures more or less probable, formed upon the first signs and expressions that were obtained from the young girl, when she began to speak French, some months after being taken; and certainly so circumstantiate a relation, founded on no better authority than signs, is very little to be depended on.

Nor do I think we can have more dependence upon what Le Blanc pretends to remember of there having been aboard the ship in which she was transported, some people who understood her language, which was nothing but shrill piercing cries, formed in the throat, without any articulation or motion of the lips. As to her two embarkations, of which she has preserved a pretty distinct idea, and about which she has never varied, the truth of them, as well as of her having remained some time in a hot country, such as our West India islands, seems to be in some measure confirmed by this, that sugar canes, cassave, or manioc, the known productions of the hottest climates, were by no means new or unknown objects to her, for she remembers to have eat of them; and the first time they were shewn her in France, she seized them very greedily. I take notice of these circumstances, because they tend to form a connection between the several parts of the adventures that may have conducted Madamoiselle Le Blanc from the northern regions, of which she appears to be a native, first into the West Indies, and from thence into Europe, somewhere near the frontiers of France.

She and her companion catched the fish with their hands, either in the sea, in lakes, or in rivers; for Madamoiselle Le Blanc could not explain to me which; nor could she give me any other description of their manner of fishing, except that when they saw in the water, where their sight was extremely acute, any fishes, they instantly pursued and catched them, then returned to the surface of the water to gut and wash them, immediately afterwards eat them and then went in quest of more. It must therefore have been either in some river, or if in the sea, it could only be when the ship was at anchor in some port or road, that they fished in this manner: Of this I was persuaded by one of her adventures; for she told me, that having one day thrown herself into the water, not to fish, as it would seem, because she did not chuse to return again, but to make her escape, on account of some harsh usage, and having swam about a considerable time, she betook herself at last to a steep rock, on which she scrambled, as she says, like a cat; and having been pursued thither by a boat or canoe, she was retaken with much difficulty, being found concealed among some bushes. All this shows, that the ship was not far from land, though it is not unlikely that this escape may be the same with that mentioned above, of which M. de L—— was an eye-witness at Songi.

On account of this flight, perhaps, or some other attempts of the same kind, the two little savages were confined to the hold of the ship; but this precaution had like to have proved fatal both to them and to the rest of the crew likewise. Perceiving themselves near the water, their favourite element, they formed a scheme of scratching a hole in the ship with their nails, by which they might make their escape into the water. The crew, however, luckily discovered their operations, in time enough to prevent the effect of them, and thereby escaped an unavoidable shipwreck. This attempt made them chain the two little savages in such a way as to put it out of their power to resume their work.

From this we may believe, that these children required to be very sharply looked after; and their aversion to being touched, must have increased the difficulty of keeping them. According to Le Blanc's account, it was very troublesome to their governors to approach them; for, whether their abhorrence of being touched was natural to them, or proceeded from the remembrance of their being carried off, or the dread of ill usage, they became furious on perceiving any person come near them; and it was necessary for such person carefully to guard himself against their arms and nails; or, failing these, against their fists, which were weilded with a strength of arm greatly superior to that of our children of the same age.

Upon their arrival in Champagne, their arms were, by Madamoiselle Le Blanc's account, a short stick, of a thickness proportioned to their strength, having at its end a round knot of very hard wood, the whole in the shape of a club, together with a knife resembling a gardener's pruning knife, but having two blades, each larger than that of a pruning knife, folding down upon the opposite sides of a wooden handle. This last instrument served principally to divide and open the animals they catched, or to defend themselves in a close engagement, These arms, she says, they carried in a kind of bag or pocket, fixed to a large piece of skin, which was wrapped round their bodies, and reached down to their knees. Upon my asking, Whether that dress did not incommode them in climbing trees, in the manner she had mentioned? She answered, that it did not; for that on such occasions, they held the back part of it in their teeth. Upon my inquiring with more than ordinary anxiety about this dress, and their other ornaments, that I might the better find them out in certain figures in my possession, representing Esquimaux, she told me, that her first cloaths, arms, necklace, and pendants, were taken from her at M. d'Epinoy's: That there were some strange characters engraved on her arms, which perhaps might have led to a more particular discovery of her nation; but that all these things were preserved by M. d'Epinoy as a curiosity, at whose house she often saw them and dressed herself in them sometimes. I was told, however, by M. de L——, that he never knew any thing of these arms: But I have already observed, that this gentleman only saw Le Blanc for the first time in that house, two years after her capture. She was then dressed in a kind of vest, or, as she says herself, a jacquet of stuff, which, by M. de L——'s account, did not hinder her, upon seeing a door open that led to a large pond, to run and throw herself into it, to swim round all its sides, and to land upon a piece of dry ground she found in it, where she fell at eating frogs.

It appears, that after the escape of these two children, from whatever place it was, being then capable of any other views or intentions than those of liberty and self-preservation, they pursued no other rout than chance or necessity presented. At night, when, according to Le Blanc, they saw more distinctly than in the day, (which however must not be understood literally, though her eyes do still retain somewhat of that faculty) they travelled about in search of food and drink. The small game which they catched sitting, and the roots of trees, were their provisions; their arms and nails supplying the place of caterer and cook. They passed the day either in holes, in bushes, or upon trees, as the nature of the place permitted. The trees were their refuge against the wild beasts which they discovered; they served them likewise as their watchtowers, from whence they could observe at a distance whether any of their enemies were near, when they wanted to come down; and it was here they waited, as it were in ambush, for the passing of any game, upon which they either leaped all of a sudden, or went in pursuit of them. Providence, which bestows on every creature the instincts and faculties necessary for the preservation of its kind, had endued these with a power of motion in the eyes quite inconceiveable; their movement was so extemely quick, and their sight so sharp, that they might be said to see in the same instant on every side of them, without hardly moving their heads. The little of this faculty that Le Blanc still retains, is astonishing, when she chuses to how it; for at other times her eyes are like ours, which she reckons a lucky circumstance, it having cost a great deal of pains to deprive them of their quick motion, and in which they had almost despaired of succeeding.

The trees were likewise their beds, or rather their cradles; for, according to her description, they slept soundly in them, either sitting, or probably riding on some branch, suffering themselves to be rocked by the winds, and exposed to every inclemency of the weather, without any other precaution than the securing themselves with one hand, and using the other by way of pillow.