We may form a more simple story still, by supposing these two little savages to have been transported from their northern country, to some of the French West-India islands, such as St. Domingo, Guadaloupe, or Martinico, and to have been purchased there by some Frenchman, who soon after returned, with his family, to France, and settled in Lorraine, having brought these two children thither along with him. It is probable that they would soon make their escape. This would very naturally account for the little Le Blanc's seeming to understand some French words, and mincing others, almost immediately after she was caught; and likeways, for the circumstances which they at first discovered by her signs, and afterwards by her conversation, of her having been about a Lady whom she had seen working at a sort of tapestry. This last supposition too requires but a very short space of time, twelve or fifteen days perhaps, between her escape from her master in Lorrain, and her appearing near Chalons. Whence we may more easily conceive how her black colour still continued, altho' she had swam across one river at least. This appears to me to be only attended with one difficulty, namely, that altho' these two children were found so near the place from whence they had escaped, and their story became public, yet their masters never discovered themselves. This objection, however, is by ns means unanswerable. Perhaps their master or mistress being tired of them, and having despaired of being able to tame them, were not at all displeased to get rid of them, and therefore gave themselves no trouble about recovering them, or, at least, did not insist on their being restored. This is, in some measure, confirmed by what M. de L—— told me of some enquiry having been made from Holland, as he thinks, in consequence of which the young savage was claimed from the late M d'Epinoy, who refused to return her: But it should seem that the requisition has been but faintly insisted on.

Were any nation known which made use of such shrill piercing cries thro' the throat, as were familiar to Madamoiselle le Blanc, by way of language, we should have no doubt about her native country: But still she must have come into France in some such way as we have been describing. It is alledged, that the demand of the young savage was made, on occasion of the letter published in the Mercury; but I have not been able certainly to discover from whence it came. Then was the time to have traced her to her source, and to have been much more exactly acquainted with her history. Perhaps it may not be too late still; and the publication of this relation may procure new light in this very curious and dark affair; which is one of the principal motives that have induced me to compose it.

I Have proved that there is great reason to think, that Madamoiselle le Blanc is of the Esquimaux nation; but as my proofs are equally applicable to the savages of Greenland, Spitzbergen, and Nova Zembla, if it were of importance to know exactly, whether she is a native of the continent of America, or of that of Europe, it is still in our power; for we know that American savages, both men and women, have a certain peculiarity, which distinguishes them both from Europeans, Africans, and Asiatics.