ONE evening in the month of September 1731, a girl nine or ten years old, pressed, as it would seem, by thirst, entered about the twilight into Songi, a village situated four or five leagues south of Chalons in Champagne. She had nothing on her feet: her body was covered with rags and skins: her hair with a gourd leaf; and her face and hands were black as a Negroe's. She was armed with a short baton, thicker at one end than the other, like a club. Those who first observed her, took to their heels, crying out, "There is the devil." And indeed her dress and colour might very well suggest this idea to the country people. Happiest were they who could soonest secure their doors and windows; but one of them, thinking, perhaps, that the devil was afraid of dogs, set loose upon her a bull dog with an iron collar. The little savage seeing him advancing in a fury, kept her ground without flinching, grasping her little club with both hands, and stretching herself to one side, in order to give greater scope to her blow. Perceiving the dog within her reach, she discharged such a terrible blow on his head as laid him dead at her feet.[1] Elated with her victory, she jumped several times over the dead carcase of the dog. Then she tried to open a door, which not being able to effect, she ran back to the country towards the river, and mounting a tree, fell quietly asleep.

The late Viscount d'Epinoy happened to be then at his country house of Songi; where, having heard the various accounts of the little savage that had appeared on his grounds, he gave orders to catch her; and particularly to the shepherd who had discovered her the first in a vineyard.

One of the country people, by a very simple thought, but which was attributed to his great knowledge of the manners and customs of savages, conjectured that she was thirsty, and advised to place a pitcher full of water at the foot of the tree in which she was sitting, to tempt her to come down. They followed his advice; and after placing the pitcher, retired from the tree, but still kept privately a close watch on her. Upon which the little savage, after having first looked sharply around, to see whether any body observed her, came down the tree, and went to drink at the pitcher, plunging her chin into the water; but something having startled her, she regained the top of the tree before they had time to apprehend her.

This first stratagem having failed, the same person by whom it had been suggested, again advised to place a woman and some children near the tree, because savages commonly are not so shy of them as of men; and he bade them above all show her a friendly air, and a smiling countenance. His directions were complied with, A woman with a child in her arms came walking near the tree, carrying different sorts of roots and two fishes in her hands, which she held out to the savage, who, desirous to have them, descended a branch or two, but went back again. The woman, still continuing her invitation with an affable, pleasant countenance, accompanied with all possible signs of friendship, such as laying her hand upon her breast, as if to assure her that she loved her, and would do her no harm; the savage was at last emboldened to come down the tree to receive the roots and fishes that were offered her in so kindly a manner: but the woman enticing her from the tree, by retiring insensibly, gave time to the men who were lying in wait for her, to advance and seize her. She never told me any thing of the grief she felt on being taken, nor of the efforts she made to escape; but we may easily imagine both. She thinks, that, according to the best of her recollection, she was caught two or three days after crossing a river. This river must certainly be the Marne, which runs at about the distance of half a league east from Songi: In which case the little savage must have come from the quarter of Lorrain.

The shepherd and the rest who had caught and brought her to the castle, carried her first into the kitchen, till M. d'Epinoy should be informed of her arrival. The first thing there that appeared to draw her attention, was some fowls which the cook was dressing; at these she flew so greedily, and with such amazing agility, that the astonished cook beheld one of them in her teeth before he imagined she had reached it. M. d'Epinoy arriving in the mean time, and seeing what she was eating, caused give her an unskinned rabbit, which she instantly stripped of the skin, and devoured.

Those who considered her then, were of opinion, that she was about nine years of age. She seemed black, as I have already said; but it soon appeared, after washing her several times, she was naturally white, as she still continues. They observed likewise, that her fingers, and in particular her thumbs, were extraordinarily large, in proportion to the rest of her hand, which was otherwise neat enough: And to this day her thumbs retain somewhat of that largeness, as I have seen with my own eyes. By her account, these large strong thumbs were very useful to her during her wild lifé in the woods: For when she had a mind to pass from one tree to another, without being at the trouble of descending and remounting, if the branches of the two trees were but at a small distance from each other, and though of no greater thickness than her finger, she would place her thumbs on a branch of the tree in which she happened to be, and by their means spring to the other, just like a squirrel. From this we may judge of the strength of those thumbs of her's, which were able, in this manner, to sustain the whole weight of her body in springing. The similitude of the squirrel is entirely her own: and indeed the flying squirrels which she may have seen in her youth, might have suggested to her this method of transporting herself; a circumstance that gives additional weight to the conjectures which we shall afterwards offer with respest to her native country.